
Scenarios:
1) Using personal account

   Use case: daily work with gitlab

   After migration in order to use GitLab through https you able to create Personal Access Token and use it instead password.

   You can create as many personal access tokens as you like.

On the left sidebar, select your avatar.
Select Edit profile.
On the left sidebar, select Access tokens.
Select Add new token.

   SSH authentication remains unchanged

2) Using Auto Account

    Use cases:
       Legacy integrations with CI/CD,  Unable to use other methods (the needs to manage group via API e.g. for Terraform)
   If you want to utilize auto accounts after migration you should take several steps:
   1. Enable MFA for your auto account
      please apply with a request and provide a list of accounts.
      https://support.epam.com/ess?id=sc_cat_item&sys_id=a914679897ffd910386e3a871153afca&name=RequestHelpOrConsultation

      1.1 In the "Service / application / process name" dropdown of the request form, pick "Multifactor Authentication (MFA)"


   2. In private tab in your browser login to gitlab UI as auto account, using domain password and approve configured MFA
   3. Create Personal access token and/or ssh key
   4. Use that token or key for gitlab authentication where needed

3) Using project access token

   Use cases:
     Commonly used for any type of integrations (CI/CD, various automation processes) as it's scope-optimized this is the best solution at the moment.
   Project access tokens are similar to passwords, except you can limit access to resources, select a limited role.

   To create a project access token:

On the left sidebar, select Search or go to and find your project.
Select Settings > Access tokens.
Select Add new token.

   Note: new "bot" user will be created in your repository that internal user represents your access token.

4) Using deploy keys
   Use cases:
      Legacy ssh integrations, some cases when ssh preferable.
   Deploy keys quite similar to project access token, but utilize ssh connection
   To create a deploy key:

On the left sidebar, select Search or go to and find your project.
Select Settings > Repository.
Expand Deploy keys.
Select Add new key.

5) Using group access token
   Use cases:
       Group level integrations, (creating new projects, assign group permissions through API)
   To create a group access token:

On the left sidebar, select Search or go to and find your group.
Select Settings > Access tokens.
Select Add new token.
  Note: group access tokens can be only created via UI


FAQ:
   Q: Is it possible to create a token without expiration time?
   A: No, GitLab access tokens have lifetime limits, max 1 year.

   Q: Is it possible to assign multiple MFA devises for Auto Account
   A: Yes, it is possible to assign multiple MFA devices per user account, and a user with MFA can do it. However, we do not recommend adding more than three devices as it can become difficult to manage, especially if a person changes projects. In such cases, you would need to identify the correct device and remove it via https://mysignins.microsoft.com/security-info.

   Q: How can I remember the time for token rotation?
   A: You will receive an email notification about token expiration. Note: if you are using auto account notification will be sent to its email address.

Links with detailed documentation:
Personal Access Token:  https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/profile/personal_access_tokens.html
Project Access Tokens: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/settings/project_access_tokens.html
Group Access Tokens: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/group/settings/group_access_tokens.html
Deploy keys: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/project/deploy_keys/
SSH Keys: https://docs.gitlab.com/ee/user/ssh.html
