## React Server Components & Server Actions
Learning Objectives

By the end of this chapter, you will be able to do the following:

- Create and use React Server Components (RSCs)
- Describe how (and when) RSCs are executed and rendered to the screen
- Fetch data and perform asynchronous operations with the help of RSCs
- Draw server-client boundaries by building and using client components
- Perform server-side data mutations with the help of Server Actions
- Update the user interface (UI) in response to Server Actions


### Introduction
In the previous chapter, you learned that you can use server-side rendering (SSR) to render React components on the server. SSR ensures that users receive a fully populated HTML document upon their initial HTTP request, not an almost empty page shell. You were also introduced to Next.js and learned how you may use that framework to build React apps that come with SSR (and many other useful features) out of the box.

This chapter builds upon the previous one—specifically, you’ll learn about two crucial React features that are unlocked by Next.js: React Server Components (RSCs) and Server Actions.

Throughout this chapter, you’ll learn how these two features help with data fetching and mutations, and **why you can’t use them in every React project**, even though they’re technically part of React—not Next.js.

#### Note

RSCs and Server Actions are relatively new React features. Supporting them in custom React projects is tricky, as you will learn throughout this chapter.

Whilst unlikely, it is possible that concepts or features related to RSCs or Server Actions change. It’s also possible that supporting these features in custom projects gets easier.

That’s why this book comes with a dedicated document that tracks any significant changes you should be aware of: https://github.com/mschwarzmueller/book-react-key-concepts-e2/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md.

### The Problem with Server-side Data Fetching
If you have an SSR-enabled React app, either by manually enabling it, for example, in a Vite-based project, or by using a framework like Next.js, 
**your React component functions get executed on the server**. Thus, any data required by those components **should be fetched on the server**.

But as explained in the previous chapter, in the Server-side Data Fetching Is Not Trivial section, 
sending HTTP requests with the help of `useEffect()` or trying to update the UI via `useState()` **does not work when using SSR**. 
On the server, React only calls the component functions **once** — it does not re-execute them when the state changes. It also **doesn’t call** your effect functions.
